= Introduction

Ruby-based web service for speech recognition, using the PocketSphinx gstreamer module.

= Requirements

* Ruby 1.8
* Sinatra
* Rack
* Unicorn
* PocketSphinx (NOTE: some features of the server require patched PocketSphinx, see below)
* Some acoustic and language models for PocketSphinx


= Installing

== CMU Sphinx

* Install sphinxbase from SVN (make, make install)

=== Apply PocketSphinx patch

In cmusphinx/pocketsphinx directory:

  wget http://www.phon.ioc.ee/~tanela/ps_gst.patch
  patch  -p0 -i ps_gst.patch


Make sure you have GStreamer devevelopment packages installed. In Debian Squeeze:

  apt-get install libgstreamer0.10-dev libgstreamer-plugins-base0.10-dev
  
And configure, make, make install as usual.

== Install Ruby gems: Unicorn and Sinatra, UUID tools, JSON, locale

This assumes you have ruby and rubygems installed.

You might want to do this as root:

  gem install unicorn
  gem install sinatra
  gem install uuidtools
  gem install json
  gem install locale
  
Install ruby-gstreamer package (might vary depending on your distribution):
  
  apt-get install libgst-ruby1.8

== Additional tools

English GF-based recognizer also need:

* libtext-unidecode-perl
* Phonetisaurus, Phonetisaurus prebuilt model for English (http://code.google.com/p/phonetisaurus/downloads/detail?name=g014b2b.tgz)
* Python


== Run ruby-pocketsphinx-server

Clone the git repository:

  git clone git://github.com/alumae/ruby-pocketsphinx-server.git
  
Before executing, add `/usr/local/lib` to the path where GStreamer plugins are looked for:

  export GST_PLUGIN_PATH=/usr/local/lib

= Running

 unicorn -c unicorn.conf.rb config.ru
 
If you installed Unicorn as a Ruby gem, you might need to execute:
 
 /var/lib/gems/1.8/bin/unicorn -c unicorn.conf.rb config.ru
 
Test the default configuration (English WSJ language model with HUB4 acostic models), using a raw audio file in the PocketSphinx test directory 
(replace `$(POCKETSPHINX_DIR)` with the Pocketsphinx source directory):

  curl -T $(POCKETSPHINX_DIR)/test/data/wsj/n800_440c0207.wav -H "Content-Type: audio/x-wav"  "http://localhost:8080/recognize"
  
Response should be:

  {
    "status": 0,
    "hypotheses": [
      {
        "utterance": "the agency isn't likely to take any action until the union's rank and file votes on the contract into three weeks"
      },
      {
        "utterance": "the agency isn't likely to take any action until the union's rank and file puts on the contract into three weeks"
      },
      {
        "utterance": "the agency isn't likely to take any action until the union's rank and file funds from the contract into three weeks"
      },
      {
        "utterance": "the agency isn't likely to take any action until the union's rank and file for from the contract into three weeks"
      },
      {
        "utterance": "the agency isn't likely to take any action until the union's rank and file parts of the contract into three weeks"
      }
    ],
    "id": "8686a37b5674cbdc63deb13f73de81a5"
  }


= Configuration

== Web service

Unicorn configuration is in file unicorn.conf.rb. See http://unicorn.bogomips.org/examples/unicorn.conf.rb for
more info. 

== Recognizer

See conf.yaml

= Using the web service

Some of the more advanced examples below are specific to the Estonian configuration.

==Example 1

Record a sentence to a wav file, in mono (hit Ctrl-C when done speaking):

 rec -c 1 sentence.wav
 
 
Send it to the web service:

 curl   -X POST --data-binary @sentence.wav -H "Content-Type: audio/x-wav"  http://localhost:8080/recognize

Output (encoded using json, the example uses Estonian models):

  {
    "status": 0,
    "hypotheses": [
      {
        "utterance": [
          "t\u00e4na on v\u00e4ljas \u00fcsna ilus ilm"
        ]
      }
    ],
    "id": "e30f54561135d681599915562d77d240"
  }
 
== Example 2

Record a raw file using arecord:

 arecord --format=S16_LE  --file-type raw  --channels 1 --rate 16000 > sentence2.raw

Send it to web service:
 
 curl -X POST --data-binary @sentence2.raw -H "Content-Type: audio/x-raw-int; rate=16000"  http://localhost:8080/recognize
 
== Example 3

Record a 5 second audio, pipe it to curl, which streams it directly to web service using PUT (and gets almost instant response):

 arecord --format=S16_LE --file-type raw --channels 1 --rate 16000 --duration 5 | curl -vv -T - -H "Content-Type: audio/x-raw-int; rate=16000"  http://localhost:8080/recognize
 
 
= Support for JSGF grammars

Users can use their own grammars to recognize certain sentences. The grammars should be in JSGF format.

Example JSGF (let's call it robot.jsgf)

 #JSGF V1.0;
  
 grammar robot;
   
 public <command> = (liigu | mine ) [ ( üks | kaks | kolm | neli | viis ) meetrit ] (edasi | tagasi);
 
NB! Grammars should be in the same charset that the server is using for dictionary, which currently is latin-1 (sorry for that). 
 
You need to upload the JSGF file to somewhere where the server can fetch it, let's say http://www.example.com/robot.txt
 
Now, let the server download and compile it:

 curl -vv  http://localhost:8080/fetch-lm?url=http://www.example.com/robot.jsgf

This should result in HTTP/1.1 200 OK.

Now you can use the grammar to recognize a sentence that is accepted by the grammar:

 arecord --format=S16_LE --file-type raw --channels 1 --rate 16000 --duration 5 | \
 curl -vv -T - -H "Content-Type: audio/x-raw-int; rate=16000"  http://localhost:8080/recognize?lm=http://www.example.com/robot.jsgf

Result:
 
 {
   "status": 0,
   "hypotheses": [
     {
       "utterance": "mine viis meetrit tagasi"
     }
   ],
   "id": "9e3895e9ee0b5138e73c6fca30f51a58"
 }

If you update the grammar on the server, you need to make the /fetch-jsgf request again, as the server doesn't check for changes every time
a recognition request is done (for efficiency reasons).

= Support for GF grammars

GF (Grammatical Framework) grammars are supported. 

A GF grammar must be compiled into a .pgf file. To upload it to the server, use the fetch-pgf API call, e.g.:
  
  curl "http://bark.phon.ioc.ee/speech-api/v1/fetch-lm?url=http://kaljurand.github.com/Grammars/grammars/pgf/Calc.pgf&lang=Est"
  
The 'lang' attribute (defaults to 'Est') specifies input languages of the grammar. Many comma-separated languages can be specified, e.g lang=Est,Est2

To recognize with a GF, use similar request as with JSGF, e.g.:

  arecord --format=S16_LE --file-type raw --channels 1 --rate 16000 --duration 5 | curl -vv -T - -H "Content-Type: audio/x-raw-int; rate=16000"  "http://localhost:8080/recognize?lm=http://kaljurand.github.com/Grammars/grammars/pgf/Calc.pgf
  
You can also specify output language(s) that will be used to linearize the raw recognition result, e.g.:
 
 arecord --format=S16_LE --file-type raw --channels 1 --rate 16000 --duration 5 | curl -vv -T - -H "Content-Type: audio/x-raw-int; rate=16000"  "http://localhost:8080/recognize?lm=http://kaljurand.github.com/Grammars/grammars/pgf/Calc.pgf&output-lang=App"
 
Output:

 {
  "status": 0,
  "hypotheses": [
    {
      "utterance": "viis minutit sekundites",
      "linearizations": [
        {
          "lang": "App",
          "output": "5 ' IN \""
        },
        {
          "lang": "App",
          "output": "5 min IN s"
        }
      ]
    }
  ],
  "id": "83486feaca30995401ed4a66951a3f23"
 }
  
Multiple output languages can be used, by using comma-separated values: "..&output-lang=App,App2"
